{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1504\cocoasubrtf830
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red191\green191\blue191;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\csgray\c79525;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{square\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'01\uc0\u9642 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}
{\list\listtemplateid2\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{square\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid101\'01\uc0\u9642 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid2}
{\list\listtemplateid3\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{square\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid201\'01\uc0\u9642 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid3}
{\list\listtemplateid4\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{square\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid301\'01\uc0\u9642 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid4}
{\list\listtemplateid5\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{square\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid401\'01\uc0\u9642 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid5}
{\list\listtemplateid6\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{hyphen\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid501\'01\uc0\u8259 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid6}
{\list\listtemplateid7\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{square\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid601\'01\uc0\u9642 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid7}
{\list\listtemplateid8\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{square\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid701\'01\uc0\u9642 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid8}
{\list\listtemplateid9\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{square\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid801\'01\uc0\u9642 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid9}
{\list\listtemplateid10\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{square\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid901\'01\uc0\u9642 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid10}
{\list\listtemplateid11\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{square\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1001\'01\uc0\u9642 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid11}
{\list\listtemplateid12\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{square\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1101\'01\uc0\u9642 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid12}
{\list\listtemplateid13\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{square\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1201\'01\uc0\u9642 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid13}
{\list\listtemplateid14\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{square\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1301\'01\uc0\u9642 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid14}
{\list\listtemplateid15\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{square\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1401\'01\uc0\u9642 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid15}
{\list\listtemplateid16\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{square\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1501\'01\uc0\u9642 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid16}
{\list\listtemplateid17\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{square\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1601\'01\uc0\u9642 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid17}
{\list\listtemplateid18\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{square\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1701\'01\uc0\u9642 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid18}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}{\listoverride\listid2\listoverridecount0\ls2}{\listoverride\listid3\listoverridecount0\ls3}{\listoverride\listid4\listoverridecount0\ls4}{\listoverride\listid5\listoverridecount0\ls5}{\listoverride\listid6\listoverridecount0\ls6}{\listoverride\listid7\listoverridecount0\ls7}{\listoverride\listid8\listoverridecount0\ls8}{\listoverride\listid9\listoverridecount0\ls9}{\listoverride\listid10\listoverridecount0\ls10}{\listoverride\listid11\listoverridecount0\ls11}{\listoverride\listid12\listoverridecount0\ls12}{\listoverride\listid13\listoverridecount0\ls13}{\listoverride\listid14\listoverridecount0\ls14}{\listoverride\listid15\listoverridecount0\ls15}{\listoverride\listid16\listoverridecount0\ls16}{\listoverride\listid17\listoverridecount0\ls17}{\listoverride\listid18\listoverridecount0\ls18}}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww12120\viewh8400\viewkind0
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 \ul \ulc0 General:\
\

\b0 \ulnone This is a method for finding the zero-structure of a sparse matrix 
\i A
\i0  from time series data 
\i y_j = x(t_j) + v_j
\i0 , where the continuous time trajectory 
\i x
\i0  satisfies 
\i dx = Ax dt + du
\i0 .  The method is described in the article\
\
A. Aalto & J. Goncalves. \'93Bayesian variable selection in linear dynamical systems\'94 arXiv:1802.05753, 2018.\
\
The results of the numerical example of the article can be reproduced using the file MCMC_lin_main. The data for the example is in the file paper_data.mat.\
\
The method is based on MCMC sampling, meaning that it collects a large number of network samples. If a particular link appears in 60% of the samples, that is the posterior probability for the existence of that link, given the data and the underlying assumptions. It is recommended that at least 5000 samples is collected. Nine out of ten samples are discarded (thinning), so that collecting 5000 samples requires 50000 iterations. It is recommended to run a small amount of iterations first to check that the sampler works, and then run more samples.
\b \ul \
\
\
Basic use:
\b0 \ulnone \
\
The code consists of two main files, a function MCMC_lin_init, that initialises the MCMC sampler. The sampling is done in the function MCMC_lin_iter. The inputs to this function are the data, given as a matlab structure as described below, the state of the sampler (initialised by the MCMC_lin_init), and the sampling parameters (initialised by the MCMC_lin_init, more information below). No user-defined parameters are required, although as In any Bayesian method, the prior specifications can be chosen by the user. The chosen priors are described in the aforementioned article. The output of the function consists of a matrix 
\i Plink
\i0 , which is an 
\i n
\i0  x 
\i n
\i0  matrix where 
\i n
\i0  is the dimension of the system. An element (
\i i
\i0 ,
\i j
\i0 ) of the matrix 
\i Plink
\i0  tells the number of the collected network samples in which the indicator variable 
\i s_\{i,j\}
\i0  was one, that is, variable 
\i j
\i0  was regulating variable 
\i i
\i0 . The function also returns the number of the collected samples, which is called 
\i chain
\i0 . The posterior probabilities of links are obtained by dividing 
\i Plink/chain
\i0 . The output variable 
\i xstore
\i0  gives the posterior mean of the continuous trajectory. The output variable 
\i state
\i0  contains the current state of the sampler (needed if the sampling is continued, for example). The output variable 
\i stats
\i0  contains statistics of the MCMC sampling, which are also displayed in the command window after the sampling is finished.\
\
The main file used for running the simulations contains first a burn-in, that is, running the sampler for a while and discarding all the samples. Then it contains a sampling part, and finally a part continuing the sampling process. This makes it possible to run some iterations first to get some idea, and then continue the sampling to improve the results. Notice that the method is also easily parallelisable. Just run the method on different processors, and in the end, sum up the 
\i Plink
\i0  matrices.\
\
\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b\fs28 \cf0 \ul Data:
\b0\fs24 \ulnone \
\
The data is given in a Matlab structure called 
\i data
\i0 . The time series data is included as a cell field 
\i data.ts
\i0  containing different experiments. Each cell corresponds to one experiment, and should consist of a matrix whose number of rows is the number of genes, and the number of columns is the number of time points in that experiment.\
\
\ul Example:\ulnone \
\
Number of genes is 
\i n
\i0 . Two experiments have been conducted with 
\i m1
\i0  time points in the first experiment, and 
\i m2
\i0  time points in the second experiment. The data is in matrices 
\i y1 
\i0 (
\i n 
\i0 x
\i  m1
\i0 ) and 
\i y2 
\i0 (
\i n 
\i0 x
\i  m2
\i0 ). Then the 
\i data.ts
\i0  field is generated as follows:\
\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\i \cf0 data.ts = \{y1 , y2\};
\i0 \
\
\

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt\clvertalbase \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw40\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw40\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw40\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw40\brdrcf2 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 If your data is uniformly sampled, with no external input, no missing measurements, no prior knowledge of the network, you are good to go. If this is not the case, read further.\cell \lastrow\row
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\
\

\b \ul Sampling times:
\b0 \ulnone \
\
If the sampling times are not explicitly given by the user, uniform sampling (with sampling time 1) is assumed. If the sampling is not uniform (or if different sampling frequency is used in the different experiments), this can be specified in the cell field 
\i data.Tsam
\i0 . \
\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \ul Example:\ulnone \
Possible inputs for the cell field 
\i Tsam
\i0  are:\
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\li720\fi-720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9642 
\f0 	}constant sampling time intervals (
\i dt
\i0 ) for all experiments: 
\i data.Tsam = \{dt\}
\i0 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\li720\fi-720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls2\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9642 
\f0 	}Different constant sampling time intervals (
\i dt1
\i0  and 
\i dt2
\i0 ) for the two experiments: 
\i data.Tsam = \{dt1 , dt2\};
\i0 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\li720\fi-720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9642 
\f0 	}Completely non-uniform sampling times: 
\i data.Tsam = \{[t1_1, t1_2 , \'85 , t1_m1] , [t2_1, t2_2 , \'85 , t2_m2]\}. 
\i0 In this case, the number of given time points must match the size of the corresponding measurement matrix.
\i \
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\li720\fi-720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls4\ilvl0
\i0 \cf0 {\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9642 
\f0 	}A combination of the two above: 
\i data.Tsam = \{[t1 , t2 , \'85 , tm1] , [dt2]\};
\i0 \
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \ul Additional information:\ulnone \
The sampler function wants the field 
\i Tsam
\i0  in the format of a cell field where each cell has all the measurement times (corresponding to the case of completely non-uniform sampling). If the format is something else, then the initialisation file MCMC_lin_init changes the format. However, if the user gives the sampling times in some other form, an error message will be displayed.\
\
\
\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b \cf0 \ul Explicit input (perturbations etc.):
\b0 \ulnone \
\
Explicit inputs can be given in the field 
\i data.input
\i0 . Its use is best explained through examples.\
\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \ul Example:\ulnone \
\
Say 
\i m1 
\i0 = 
\i m2 
\i0 = 8. Consider the following example cases:\
\
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\li720\fi-720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls5\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9642 
\f0 	}1) The second experiment is a perturbation experiment, where some unknown perturbation is applied half way through the experiment. This kind of input is fed as follows:\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\li720\fi-720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls6\ilvl0
\i \cf0 		data.input = \{zeros(1,8) , [0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1]\};
\i0 \
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\li720\fi-720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls7\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9642 
\f0 	}2) Both experiments are perturbation experiments with two \ul different\ulnone  perturbations. This is given as follows:\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \

\i 	data.input = \{[0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1; zeros(1,8)] , [zeros(1,8); 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1]\};
\i0 \
\
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\li720\fi-720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls8\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9642 
\f0 	}3) Both experiments have the \ul same\ulnone  perturbation. This is given as follows:\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \

\i 	data.input = \{[0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1] , [0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1]\};\
\
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\li720\fi-720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls9\ilvl0
\i0 \cf0 {\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9642 
\f0 	}4) In the first experiment, a perturbation is applied at time zero, and in the other experiment, there is no perturbation:\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \

\i 	data.input = \{ones(1,8) , zeros(1,8)\};\

\i0 \
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \ul However\ulnone , if there is only one experiment with a perturbation applied at time zero, then an input of the form 
\i \{ones(1,8)\}
\i0  does not have any effect, and it should \ul not\ulnone  be included. In such case, assuming the system was in steady state before the perturbation, it is possible to duplicate the first measurement writing\
\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\i \cf0 	data.ts = \{[y(:,1) , y]\};
\i0 \
\
and then giving input\
\

\i 	data.input = \{[0 1 1 . . . 1]\};
\i0 \

\i \
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\li720\fi-720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls10\ilvl0
\i0 \cf0 {\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9642 
\f0 	}5) The input can also be a continuous variable, such as temperature:\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
	
\i data.input = \{[T1_1 , T1_2, \'85, T1_8] , [T2_1 , T2_2, \'85, T2_8]\};
\i0 \
\
and so on.\
\
When external input is given, the size of the output matrix 
\i Plink
\i0  is 
\i n
\i0  x (
\i n
\i0 +
\i n_in
\i0 ) where 
\i n_in
\i0  is the dimension of the input. The method also tells which genes does the perturbation affect directly. If the perturbation target is known, read the section \'93Prior knowledge of the network\'94 below.\
\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \ul Additional information:\ulnone \
The above warning concerns also external inputs. For example, if the temperature variation, and its effect on the process is negligible, then it should not be included as a possible input. \
	The input is upsampled to the finer discretisation using zero-order-hold. If the user wishes to use some other scheme, it can be implemented directly in the MCMC_lin_iter file. Note that if the time series length is 
\i m
\i0 , then the final length of the inputs should be 
\i (m-1)*nstep
\i0 .\
\
\
\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b \cf0 \ul Missing measurements:
\b0 \ulnone \
\
If the measurement of some genes fail at some time points, this can be included in the information given to the method in a field 
\i data.missing
\i0 . Each cell in this field should be a matrix with size 
\i N_miss
\i0  x 2, where each row corresponds to a missing measurement of a gene. The first element on the row identifies the gene in question, and the second element tells the index of the time point where the measurement is missing. The values will be ignored in the method, so it does not matter what is the actual value of the element in the original data matrix.\
\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \ul Example:\ulnone \
\
Say the measurement of gene 2 failed at the 2nd and 3rd measurement times, and in the second experiment, the measurement of gene 3 failed in the 7th time point and the measurement of gene 5 failed in the first and fourth time points. This is given as follows:\
\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\i \cf0 data.missing = \{[2 2; 2 3] , [3 7; 5 1; 5 4]\};
\i0 \
\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \ul Additional information:\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \ulnone Missing measurements are treated so that the Crank\'97Nicolson sampler draws Brownian bridge samples between the previous and next non-missing sample (corresponding precisely to the measurement model where the missing measurements are omitted). This is achieved by first replacing missing measurements by their linear interpolates (in the file MCMC_lin_init), and then increasing the variance of the corresponding measurement noise in the MCMC_lin_iter file.\
\
\
\

\b \ul Prior knowledge of the network:
\b0 \ulnone \
\
If some links are certainly known to exist or not to exist, this information can be encoded in the field 
\i data.sure
\i0 . This should be an 
\i n
\i0  x 
\i n
\i0  matrix (or 
\i n
\i0  x (
\i n
\i0  + 
\i n_in
\i0 ) where 
\i n_in
\i0  is the input dimension if one also has prior knowledge on the targets of potential inputs) with ones in the positions indicating links that are known to exist, minus ones on the places known not to exist, and zeros elsewhere. Such prior information improves the results and speeds up the sampling as the number of candidate networks decreases.\
\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \ul Example:\ulnone \
\
In a 3 x 3 network, it is known for sure that gene 3 is a regulator of gene 1. In addition, there is one perturbation (external input) which is known to affect only gene 2. This is written as\
\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\i \cf0 data.sure = [0 0 1 -1; 0 0 0 1; 0 0 0 -1];
\i0 \
\
\
\
\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b\fs28 \cf0 \ul Method parameters
\b0\fs24 \ulnone \
\
Method parameters are given to the MCMC_lin_iter-function as a structure called 
\i parameters
\i0 . The values are set in the file MCMC_lin_init, and it is not necessary to change these parameters, although it is advised that the user chooses a good value for the 
\i link_pr
\i0  parameter. The parameter fields are:\
\
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\li720\fi-720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls11\ilvl0
\i \cf0 {\listtext	
\f1\i0 \uc0\u9642 
\f0\i 	}link_pr
\i0 : The prior for networks is that the existence of each link is independent of others. If a link exists with (prior) probability 
\i p
\i0 , then 
\i link_pr
\i0  = 
\i p / (1-p)
\i0 . This parameter controls the level of sparsity in the network samples. This should be specified by the user. For example, if there are 50 nodes, and it is expected that each node has about 2-3 (incoming/outgoing) links, then one should set, for example, 
\i p
\i0  = 2.5 / 50. By default, this value is 1/n, unless the user explicitly gives another value.\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\li720\fi-720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls12\ilvl0
\i \cf0 {\listtext	
\f1\i0 \uc0\u9642 
\f0\i 	}its
\i0 : number of iterations.\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\li720\fi-720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls13\ilvl0
\i \cf0 {\listtext	
\f1\i0 \uc0\u9642 
\f0\i 	}nstep
\i0 : number of steps in the \'93continuous\'94 trajectory between the measurement times. Default value is 8.\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\li720\fi-720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls14\ilvl0
\i \cf0 {\listtext	
\f1\i0 \uc0\u9642 
\f0\i 	}Theur
\i0 : a temperature variable used in a heuristic scheme to speed up the topology sampling. If 
\i Theur
\i0  is one, it corresponds to exact sampling. Higher 
\i Theur
\i0  improves the acceptance probability of the topology sampling.\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\
A number of different \ul step size parameters\ulnone  can be set by the user. Shorter step sizes increase the acceptance rates of the MCMC sampling, but it has a negative effect on the efficiency of the exploration of the parameter space. The trajectory is sampled together with the noise variance q. Therefore if their acceptance probability is low, it might be that one of the step sizes is too big.\
\
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\li720\fi-720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls15\ilvl0
\i \cf0 {\listtext	
\f1\i0 \uc0\u9642 
\f0\i 	}etraj
\i0 : step size for the Crank\'97Nicolson sampler for the continuous trajectory. Default value is 0.15, and it is recommended that this is at least 0.1. It can be adjusted if the acceptation probability for the trajectory becomes low, which may happen if there are several experiments in the data.\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\li720\fi-720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls16\ilvl0
\i \cf0 {\listtext	
\f1\i0 \uc0\u9642 
\f0\i 	}em
\i0 : step size for sampling the 
\i M-
\i0 parameters.\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\li720\fi-720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls17\ilvl0
\i \cf0 {\listtext	
\f1\i0 \uc0\u9642 
\f0\i 	}er
\i0 : step size for sampling the measurement error variance 
\i r
\i0 .\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\li720\fi-720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls18\ilvl0
\i \cf0 {\listtext	
\f1\i0 \uc0\u9642 
\f0\i 	}eq
\i0 : step size for sampling the process noise covariance 
\i q
\i0 .\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\
\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b\fs28 \cf0 \ul Troubleshooting
\b0\fs24 \ulnone \
\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\i \cf0 Problem
\i0 : The acceptance probabilities for the trajectory and the topology are (almost) zero.\
\

\i Possible solutions
\i0 : The step size of the trajectory (
\i parameters.etraj
\i0 ) can be reduced, but it should not be below 0.1. It is possible that the initial value for the process noise covariance is too small. Try to increase it by changing it in the file MCMC_lin_init (
\i state.q
\i0 ). There is also a heuristic temperature variable (
\i parameters.Theur
\i0 ) which is one by default. It can be increased to about 1.5 to speed-up topology sampling. However, this method is heuristic, and then the sampling is not exactly what is claimed.\
\
}